
Ensuring Fairness: Requiring Blind Trusts for Congress


Focus Question: Should congresspeople be limited to investing in blind trusts?

Over 97 Congresspeople have made stock market trades that potentially conflict with their legislative committee responsibilities. (See Appendix A) Congresspeople’s stock trading has led to discussions about ethics, highlighting how important it is to tell the difference between legal and illegal investments like insider trading. Congresspeople frequently have access to material information that is not publicly known, which unfairly benefits them if they trade on that information; this also destroys public trust in Congress and the stock market. Congress must mandate blind trusts for its members to prevent conflicts of interest. This policy will protect the fairness and integrity of the stock market, prevent insider trading, and increase public trust in the legislative process.

Stock trading impacts financial markets, but raises ethical concerns. Addressing these issues in Congress requires understanding the difference between illegal insider trading and legal strategies like blind trusts. Stock trading comes in many forms; according to Investopedia, “Stock trading involves buying and selling shares in publicly traded companies.” When someone wants to buy or sell a stock, they place an order through their brokerage, and the market matches buyers with sellers. Stock prices fluctuate based on supply and demand, and also company performance. There are other ways to invest, like blind trusts. Blind trusts are used to prevent conflicts of interest for people in positions of influence, like politicians or corporate executives. Blind trusts allow them to invest without knowledge or control of their investments. Insider trading, on the other hand, is illegal trading. Insider trading involves trading based on material that is nonpublic information. According to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
An “insider” is…anyone who possesses inside information because of his or her relationship with the Company or with an officer, director or principal stockholder of the Company…This rule also covers any employee who has obtained material non-public corporate information, as well as any person who has received a “tip” from an Insider of the Company concerning information about the Company that is material and nonpublic, and trades (i.e. purchase or sells) the Company’s stock or other securities. 

The material has to be something that can fluctuate the price of the stock. In an interview, Aaron Husock, an Asher Capital portfolio manager, says, “So material means that it's important. It has to be something that other investors in that stock would want to know. Like, say, I was meeting with the CEO of a company. And he told me, oh, I'm thinking that tomorrow I'm going to buy all the employees pizza for lunch. That's not material…” Insider trading is illegal and can undermine the fairness of the stock market, but it can be prevented with blind trusts. 
Insider trading undermines market fairness and deters regular investors from participating, decreasing market liquidity and efficiency. This reduction in liquidity can negatively impact the economy by causing increased stock price spreads. When regular people who invest or trade stocks notice this unleveled playing field, they tend not to trade. According to Business Insider, not trading in the stock market leads to a “decrease in overall market liquidity and efficiency.” A decrease in market liquidity is bad for the economy. When the market has high liquidity, people can quickly buy and sell stocks without big changes in the bid and ask prices. A highly liquid market encourages more participants, ensuring that trades are executed smoothly and at predictable prices. In contrast, a low liquidity market means fewer buyers and sellers are in the market, causing an increased spread of stock prices. When there is an increased spread of stock prices, companies that rely on the stock market to raise capital start losing money. This is because they face higher costs and difficulty in securing investment. Husock says, “For less liquid stocks, maybe the spread becomes a dollar and the whole capital market just starts to function poorly.” Overall, a less liquid market leads to an economic slowdown. Reduced market activity interferes with capital formation and investment, further increasing economic challenges.
Members of Congress have access to nonpublic material information due to their roles in committees that oversee various laws and policies affecting specific stocks. This creates opportunities for insider trading. For example, if they pass a law that restricts AI use, companies that specialize in AI would see a decrease in their stocks, when Congress has this information and the ability to trade stocks they can use it illegally to avoid losses. One example of a Congressperson using nonpublic material information is New York Congressman Christopher Collins. On June 22, 2017, Collins was convicted of insider trading. In an article from the US Attorney’s office, Geoffrey S. Berman, the US Attorney for the Southern District of New York, said “Former New York Congressman and Innate board member Christopher Collins received confidential, nonpublic information that one of Innate’s drugs in development had just failed a clinical trial… Collins notified his son Cameron, so that he could trade the stock ahead of the public announcement and avoid taking a substantial loss on the stock…”  Congressman Collins has material information that he used to avoid losses on a stock. As a Congressperson, he should not use his job as a way to profit. Another example of Congresspeople doing suspicious activities is the former U.S. Congressman Stephen Buyer. He was convicted of insider trading. As stated by the Reuters article, “Prosecutors said at trial that Buyer bought Sprint stock after learning from a T-Mobile executive that the telecommunications companies were in merger talks in 2018 and made illegal trades again the following year.” Buyer also acted on insider information and made profits from it. These are two of many examples of Congresspeople abusing their job as public servants for profit.
The STOCK Act of 2012 is currently the primary regulation preventing insider trading by Congressmembers. Implementing blind trusts and tightening enforcement of the STOCK Act will further prevent insider trading. The STOCK Act makes it mandatory for Congresspeople to report trades that are valued over $1000 within 45 days of the transaction. The consequence of violating this act is a $200 fine. In an article talking about the STOCK Act, Investopedia says, “The STOCK Act sought to address the perceived conflicts of interest in stock trading by members of Congress and other federal officials.” According to many articles and Congresspeople, a blind trust would fix the issue of insider trading. Blind trusts would fix the insider trading problem because people in Congress wouldn't have a say in what they want to invest in. Another way to crack down on insider trading would be to tighten up the STOCK Act and start prosecuting cases that are in a gray area. Husock says, “We can also just prosecute some of them, right? …They know that the US government has decided to give Intel $5 billion to build their new plant in Ohio and if they buy Intel stock before that announcement, they should go to jail. Like that's another way to do it is we just enforce those laws on members of Congress.” Husock says that if the rules of insider trading were enforced, then a blind trust wouldn't be necessary. As of right now, there are two ways to battle insider trading, which is to expand the Stock Act and make it more strict, and the other way is to limit stock trading to blind trust for Congresspeople.  
To solve the problem of insider trading in Congress, blind trusts are the best solution. This policy would prevent conflicts of interest and keep the market's integrity safe. Currently, in Congress, 4 acts have been introduced to stop congressional insider trading; those 4 acts have been introduced by both Republicans and Democrats, meaning insider trading is a problem that both sides are trying to solve. One example of this is Bill S.693 introduced by Republican Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri. Hawley’s bill ends stock trading for executive branch officials, except for blind trusts. In this act, Hawley writes out, 
The Department of Justice may bring a civil action in U.S. district court against any covered individual who violates this bill's prohibition. The Government Accountability Office, at specified intervals, must (1) audit compliance by a representative sample of covered individuals with this bill's requirements, and (2) report the results to the supervising ethics committees.
This act makes sure to keep whoever violates the prohibition accountable with civil action and also makes sure to periodically check to make sure that everyone is following the rules. Another example is from Democratic Senator Jon Ossof of Georgia, who introduced a bill to ban stock trading for Congress members. In an article by his office, it says, “The American people overwhelmingly support with 86% saying they back the measure, including 88% of Democrats, 87% of Republicans, and 81% of Independents.” This quote is saying that insider trading in Congress is an issue that all sides of politics can agree on. If one of these bills passes, it will be a good step in preventing unfair trading in Congress, and building trust in the public. 
“More than 50 MPs have owned stakes in publicly listed companies that raise questions about possible conflicts of interest.” This is a quote from The Guardian stating the issue of insider trading among government officials in both Congress and the UK Parliament. The action of insider trading in public offices erodes public trust and market integrity. Lawmakers are meant to serve the public, not profit illegally. Blind trusts would prevent conflicts of interest. As current members of Congress advocate for stricter trading rules and push for blind trusts it gives a hopeful path. This bipartisan support for new legislation can restore public trust. 

Bibliography
Amond, Ryley. "Blind trusts can help prevent conflicts of interest — here's how to tell if they're right for you." CNBC. Last modified December 7, 2023. Accessed May 17, 2024. https://www.cnbc.com/select/what-is-a-blind-trust/.
CNBC is a well-known reliable business news channel. I will use this source to better understand what blind trusts are.

Campbell, Tessa, and Choncé Maddox. "What Is Insider Trading?" Edited by Richard Richtmyer. Business Insider. Last modified March 6, 2024. Accessed April 30, 2024. https://www.businessinsider.com/personal-finance/insider-trading.
This source is reliable because it's a well-known media outlet for news relating to business. I plan to use this source to know better what insider trading is and what counts as insider trading.

Dyer, Henry. "This article is more than 10 months old Revealed: shares held 'in secret' by scores of MPs raise questions about vested interests." The Guardian. Last modified July 9, 2023. Accessed May 30, 2024. https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2023/jul/09/revealed-shares-held-in-secret-by-scores-of-mps-raise-questions-about-vested-interests.

Eliminating Executive Branch Insider Trading Act, S. S.693 (as introduced, Mar. 7, 2023). Accessed May 29, 2024. https://www.congress.gov/bill/118th-congress/senate-bill/693?q=%7B%22search%22%3A%22Insider+Trading%22%7D&s=3&r=3.
This bill is reliable because it is from the official website of Congress. I will use this source to understand how congresspeople are battling insider trading in Congress.

Fernando, Jason. "STOCK Act: Meaning, Overview, Criticisms." Investopedia. Last modified August 31, 2022. Accessed May 17, 2024. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/stop-trading-on-congressional-knowledge-act.asp.
This is a known financial media website that simplifies financial news. I will use this source to better understand how the STOCK Act of 2012 works.

"Former Congressman Christopher Collins Sentenced For Insider Trading Scheme And Lying To Federal Law Enforcement Agents." United States Attorney's Office. Last modified January 17, 2020. Accessed May 10, 2024. https://justice.gov/usao-sdny/pr/former-congressman-christopher-collins-sentenced-insider-trading-scheme-and-lying.
This source is reliable because it is a press release from the United States Attorney's Office, a government office. I will use this source to learn more about the congressman Christopher Collins who was sentenced for insider trading.

Hayes, Adam. "What Is Stock Trading?" Investopedia. Last modified April 1, 2024. Accessed May 16, 2024. https://www.investopedia.com/what-is-stock-trading-7109934.
This is a known financial media website that simplifies financial news. I will use this source to better understand how stock trading works.

Husock, Aaron. Video Conference interview by the author. Zoom, Philadelphia, PA. May 15, 2024.
Aaron Husock is a reliable source because he has over 20 years of experience with the stock market and stock trading. I will use this interview to better understand how stock trading and blind trusts work.

"Insider Trading Policy." SEC.gov. Last modified November 11, 2015. Accessed May 16, 2024. https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1164964/000101968715004168/globalfuture_8k-ex9904.htm.
This is a reliable source because it's a policy from the government (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission). I will use this source to better understand what insider trading is.

Kelly, Kate, Adam Playford, Alicia Parlapiano, and Ege Uz. "Stock Trades Reported by Nearly a Fifth of Congress Show Possible Conflicts." The New York Times, September 13, 2022. Accessed April 30, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/09/13/us/politics/congress-stock-trading-investigation.html.
The New York Times is a reliable source because it is a well-renowned media outlet for all sorts of news. I will use this source to better understand which part of Congress or who trades stocks with a conflict of interest.

Moore, Jennifer. "What Is Really Unethical about Insider Trading?" Journal of Business Ethics 9, no. 3 (1990): 171–82. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25072022.

Parlapiano, Alicia, Adam Playford, Kate Kelly, and Ege Uz. "These 97 Members of Congress Reported Trades in Companies Influenced by Their Committees." The New York Times, September 13, 2022. Accessed May 10, 2024. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2022/09/13/us/politics/congress-members-stock-trading-list.html.
This is a reliable source because it is from the New York Times. I'm going to use this article to learn about congresspeople who have potential in Insider Trading, but are not fully exposed yet.

Reuters. "Ex-US congressman sentenced to 22 months for insider trading." Reuters. Last modified September 19, 2023. Accessed May 23, 2024. https://www.reuters.com/legal/ex-us-congressman-sentenced-22-months-insider-trading-2023-09-19/.

"Sens. Ossoff, Kelly Introduce Bill Banning Stock Trading by Members of Congress." Ossoff Senate. Last modified September 12, 2023. Accessed May 30, 2024. https://www.ossoff.senate.gov/press-releases/sens-ossoff-kelly-introduce-bill-banning-stock-trading-by-members-of-congress-2/.
This is a reliable source because it is from the Office of Senator Ossof. I will use this source to better understand a bill he proposed.

   
Appendix A
97 members of Congress with potential conflicts:

	

