On March 19th, 2003, former President George W. Bush invaded Iraq in fear of weapons of mass destruction. The rumor of Iraq’s possession of WMDs turned out to be false. He continued the assault on Iraq for 8 years. The Bush administration killed around 280,771-315,190 innocent Iraqi civilians since the U.S invasion. According to the laws of the International Criminal Court, George W. Bush should be prosecuted for the war crimes he committed during his administration's unlawful invasion of Iraq. Bush should be charged with war crimes because his decisions were careless, he killed hundreds of thousands of innocent people, committing war crimes like targetting civilians intentionally, the war also killed American soldiers. 

Multiple crimes count as war crimes, according to the Rome Statute. The International Criminal Court (ICC) prosecutes people who have violated the Rome Statute. The ICC’s definition of a war crime is, “Grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, namely, any of the following acts against persons or property protected under the provisions of the relevant Geneva Convention.” This includes willful killing, torture, unlawful damage, taking hostages, and a few other crimes that are under the Geneva Convention law. In subsection B of the war crimes article, it says, “Other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable in international armed conflict, within the established framework of international law.” For example, intentionally directing attacks on civilian populations and directing attacks on buildings like hospitals, places of religion, and education. Those are some actions that count as war crimes. 

Leading up to the war, Bush’s decisions were based on his own opinions, not based on his legal advisors or international laws. Whenever Bush was given legal advice, he would not take it unless the advice aligned with his agenda. On September 11th, Bush was quoted as saying, “I don’t care what the international lawyers say. We are going to kick some ass.” Presidents are supposed to uphold and follow the laws. Here Bush has no regard for the international laws that have an impact on the US. Furthermore, Bush’s legal team consisted of Alberto Gonzales and Harriet Miers who had no experience in international law, Colin Powel, who resigned because Bush did not want to adhere to Geneva Convention IV which was made to protect the civilians, and a few other advisors like John Ashcroft and James Comey who quit because their opinions were not listened to. George W. Bush was a president who needed legal advice but did not take any of the advice to heart.
	
The rumor of Iraq’s possession of WMDs led to an unnecessary war that lasted for 8 years and killed countless people. The rumor of WMDs turned out to be false. Although the data may not be correct, Bush’s administration killed 315,190 civilians from 2003 to 2023. The number continues to grow because of the damage done by the US to Iraq’s infrastructure. Some of those infrastructures include health care, food, water, and housing. In an article written by The Guardian, readers see the brutal effects of the invasion of Iraq. One story is about Showkat Abdullah al-Mashhdani, he studied and received a Ph.D. in America, and he also was a husband and father to 7 children. He was an innocent person who was trying to save children and was shot and killed in cold blood by the US Army. Wakkara the wife of Abdullah shared,

“We blame the US army for destroying our life. He was my best friend as well as my husband and I feel that life stopped completely after his death. I am just waiting to join him. My health suffered a lot and now I have to take all kinds of medication for high blood pressure and diabetes, caused by the shock.” 

The US military physically killed someone while also figuratively killing the rest of the family.

After one year of Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, the ICC issued a warrant for his arrest, but 12 years after the invasion of Iraq nothing has been done. The ICC issued a war crime for Putin. They did this because Putin did not have control over his military that was in Ukraine. His military was not held accountable for the crimes they committed. The ICC watched Iraqi civilians being tortured and killed and did nothing about it, they stood there and watched like bystanders. When it came to Ukraine, the ICC sprung to action right away and was able to charge Putin within a year. There is a bias within the ICC, when Muslims and people of color are being killed brutally, the ICC does not bat an eye. However, when white people are being killed something has to be done right away.

Bush’s administration committed 269 war crimes, and most of those crimes were directly committed by Bush himself. One of those crimes was the excessive targeting of civilians. The U.S. military targeted multiple civilian populated areas, which led to massive casualties in the death of innocent bystanders like children. Pillaging was another war crime that was committed, the US military took: In the War Crimes book, Haas wrote, “cash, printing presses, weapons, and other objects from some buildings…During the high point of the insurgency in Iraq, soldiers who searched houses sometimes took cash that they saw lying around.” Not only did they kill people and destroy lives but they also stole expensive items from the civilians. 

	Not only did the invasion of Iraq affect the innocent people of Iraq, but it also affected America on a certain level. About 5,000 US soldiers died during the Iraq war. That’s a huge loss to America’s military and to the families of those who lost their lives. The US spent around $3 trillion for the invasion of Iraq and other costs relating to the invasion. In an article written by the Guardian, they say that one of those trillions of dollars could have paid for: “8 million housing units, or 15 million public school teachers, or healthcare for 530 million children for a year, or scholarships to university for 43 million students. Three trillion could have fixed America's social security problem for half a century.” If America had not invested so much money in an illegal war, different aspects of America's economy could have been improved. 

The unlawful and brutal invasion of Iraq caused an extreme loss of life for both Iraqis and Americans. Former President George W. Bush should be charged for all 269 war crimes he committed during the invasion. Bush’s decisions leading up to the war were not legally advised by qualified lawyers and were made with mostly his input. Bush’s decision to invade Iraq was unjustified and brutal; killing more than 315,190 civilians. The ICC almost instantly issued a warrant for Putin, but Bush was never considered a war criminal. Bush committed 269 war crimes, but he was never prosecuted for any of them. The invasion of Iraq left a negative impact on America’s economy and killed around 5,000 US soldiers. 12 years after the invasion of Iraq, the perpetrator is still out in the world free, even though the whole world knows he’s guilty.  

Bibliography
Edemariam, Aida. "The true cost of war." The Guardian, February 28, 2008. Accessed May 3, 2023. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/feb/28/iraq.afghanistan.
This article was written by The Guardian. It gives a deep dive into the amount of money spent during the Iraq war and where the US spent the money. The article is important because it helps to give an understanding of how much money was wasted on an unnecessary war. This is a news article that is a secondary source.

Graham-Harrison, Emma, and Salim Habib. "'The US army destroyed our lives': five Iraqis on the war that changed the Middle East." The Guardian (London), March 19, 2023. Accessed April 24, 2023. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2023/mar/19/the-us-army-destroyed-our-lives-five-iraqis-on-the-war-that-changed-the-middle-east.
This article is published by the Guardian and it's an article that condemns the Iraq war and includes the voices of 5 people from Iraq that had their lives destroyed because of America's invasion of Iraq. This source is useful because it shows the torment that America put into the lives of innocent Iraqis that did not deserve any of the hardships the Bush administration put them through. This is a primary source. (I think not sure, it includes interviews of people who were directly affected.)

Haas, Michael. George W. Bush, War Criminal?: The Bush Administration's Liability for 269 War Crimes. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 2009. Digital file.
This book is written by Michael Haas, a political scientist. The book is about all the war crimes George W. Bush and his administration have committed. 269 war crimes to be exact. Michael Haas believes Bush and his administration should be held responsible for their crimes. Though this source might contain some biases it is really informative from one person's pov and also contains a lot of facts that are backed up by other sources. This book is helpful to my topic because it clearly outlines all the crimes he committed and what led up to the Iraq war. This is a secondary source.

Nations, United. "War Crimes." United Nations Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect. Accessed April 17, 2023. https://www.un.org/en/genocideprevention/war-crimes.shtml#:~:text=Some%20examples%20of%20prohibited%20acts,charitable%20purposes%2C%20historical%20monuments%20or.
This article written by the United Nations is specifically about war crimes. It contains the exact laws and definitions legislated by the ICC. It includes the different types of war crimes and what counts towards those crimes. This article is helpful because it specifically shows me the crimes one could be charged for, and I can then compare it to Bush's actions during the Iraq War. This is a primary source.

United Nations, Piotr Hofmański. "Situation in Ukraine: ICC judges issue arrest warrants against Vladimir Vladimirovich Putin and Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova." News release. March 17, 2023. Accessed April 18, 2023. https://www.icc-cpi.int/news/situation-ukraine-icc-judges-issue-arrest-warrants-against-vladimir-vladimirovich-putin-and#:~:text=Mr%20Vladimir%20Vladimirovich%20Putin%2C%20born,articles%208(2).
This article was written by the International Criminal Court. It was about the ICC issuing warrants for Vladimir Putin and Maria Alekseyevna for war crimes. This source was useful because it gave me insight into what their war crimes were and why the warrant was issued. This was also helpful because I can compare it to George Bush. This article is a primary source from the court that issues war crime warrants.

WATSON INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS. "Cost of War Iraqi Civilians." Watson Brown. Last modified March 20230. Accessed April 13, 2023. https://watson.brown.edu/costsofwar/costs/human/civilians/iraqi.
This article was written by Watson Brown University on the "Cost of War" website. This section of the website showed the number of Iraqi civilians that were killed during the US invasion. The article is useful because it shows helpful data to show how brutal the US invasion was. This is an article written by the Watson Institute, and it is a secondary source.



